[Inaudible].
America is suffering the most violent protests in their recent history.
Since summer 2020,
we can already kind of several people killed a political skirmishes between far
right and left activists.
[Inaudible].
It's like Portland and Seattle have been swamped by groups like the Boogaloo
boys who claimed to belong to the alt-right and support to president Trump,
others like Antifa belong to the other side of political spectrum.
It seems America is more polarized than ever.
It will be a surprise to no one.
This is not the only country where political rivalry is growing.
Maybe your country is also going through the same trend.
Democratic societies are becoming increasingly divided by two extremes.
Sometimes if we would take Twitter as a window to see reality as a whole,
it would look like we're on the edge of a new civil war and not the cool one.
Like with Marvel superhero.
Yeah.
Nevertheless, you know, here at visual politics, we care about the facts.
This is why we are wondering to what extent is polarization really something new
in the United States? I mean, think about it.
And every democracy there is a right and the left wing.
The seldom agree on the SU's politics is always a debate.
So can we really say America is more polarized now than what it was 13 years
ago.
[Inaudible].
Answering these questions are rather complicated because we cannot measure
political opinions the same way we can measure save economic growth.
Nevertheless,
many analysts have already found someone to blame for this would be
polarization. And you have probably guessed food according to many,
the source for all this protest, as the current president,
Donald Trump and truth being what it is, news Lake.
This is kind of scary.
Okay.
Trump won't commit to peaceful transfer of power.
Points.
I know many of you might be thinking isn't blaming Trump for polarization,
a polarized opinion and an of itself. I mean, think about it.
If you are a Trump supporter,
you may believe that it is the liberals who are polarizing public opinion.
And there are many examples of polarizing and extremist politicians on the
American left too.
So as you can see, this is a very complex topic.
This is why in order to analyze this issue,
we are going to ask an expert on the matter.
And he is someone very well known by all the visual politic community.
Today we are going to have on Eric phone,
aside from being one of the voices that you hear and our videos,
Eric is the host of the reconsider media podcast and the co-author of a book
called wet.
How did you become a tool for the partisan and political establishment?
Hello, grant and hello to all the visual politics, subscribers,
Dans are your questions quickly first? Yes, America is much more polarized.
It was decades ago. And to no, Trump is not to blame. If anything,
Trump is a symptom of a phenomenon that has been going on since the
seventies.
That being said, today's question is what do we mean by polarization?
And how can we measure it? Where does it come from?
Is it really a problem or is it something quintessential to any democracy today?
We are going to answer all of these questions, but before we do,
let's take a look at something.
Big ideological.
Wedge before we get started today. Let me ask you a key question.
Where would you like to live? Would you like to live in a big house,
on a quiet sparsely populated area,
or would you rather live in a downtown apartment?
If your priority is the size and the quality of the house,
chances are you're leaning towards the right wing of the political spectrum.
If your priority is to live in a lively area,
then you may fall on the left wing of the political spectrum.
At least this is what a Pew research survey concludes.
65% of the conservative voters like beggar houses and less densely populated
areas.
While 61% of liberals prepared to sacrifice size and favor of being
an alively urban.
[Inaudible].
I just gave you this example to show you how ideology is not a bad thing and
itself. In fact,
being conservative or left wing does not only affect us when it comes into
voltage. It also influences our hobbies and our lifestyle,
but this is not all another point we have to mention here is that polarization
is not the same as political extremism.
The fact that America is more polarized doesn't necessarily mean that is getting
more extreme.
In fact, in many aspects, the opposite is true. For example,
in the year 1994,
only 30% of Republicans supported gay marriage by 2014 that had Rose to
54%. And it continues to climb.
[Inaudible].
Even on topics like immigration, the left and right agree,
more than ever over 61% of Republicans believe that immigration is a good
thing.
And Americans agree in broad squads on issues such as healthcare and
climate change.
Now you might wonder then what do we mean when we see America is more polarized
polarization, doesn't come from voters getting more extreme,
but more exclusively consistent. Instead.
You're wondering then what do we mean when we say that America is getting more
polarized polarization, doesn't come from voters getting more extreme,
but more exclusively, consistent and steady,
but what does it mean to be more consistent?
We could define consistency as buying the whole ideological pack that a party is
selling. For example, for years,
the Pew research center has been conducting a survey where they give you a
questionnaire on this questionnaire.
You have two options to choose from for each policy question.
One is the conservative option and the other is the liberal option.
For instance, one question is what is the best way to ensure peace?
Is it a through military strength or is it be through diplomacy?
Another example is what do you think about environmental regulations?
A they are bonds because they Hartley economy and jobs or B,
they are good because they protect our planet.
[Inaudible].
And I'm pretty sure I don't need to tell you there,
which one is the conservative or the liberal option.
I'm sure many of you would have answers from one or the other site,
but if you answer all the questions on the same site,
then you would be considered a consistent liberal or a consistent conservative
of course, being totally consistent with one ideology is a rare thing.
This is why they give you a score based on all of your answers.
And then they determine the median of Republicans and Democrats scores.
And this is how they made this.
[Inaudible].
The attention to the graph. You will see that over time,
ideological medians have gone more to the extremes. Again,
this doesn't mean that people are going far right or far left,
but they are becoming pure conservatives or pure liberals.
And you might kind of wonder, how is this a problem?
Well,
the problem comes when this ideological consistency translates into hate against
the other tribe. In 1994,
only 17% of Republicans saw Democrats as a threat to the country and only
16% of Democrats, all Republicans as a threat by 2014,
these numbers had risen to 43% and 38% respectively.
And of course it's gotten Borst since then.
And as we'll see later on, this translates into real politics too.
Elected politicians are nothing but a reflection of the societies that vote for
them. So.
Okay. Okay.
We can say that America is really getting much more polarized than before. Now.
The question is, where does this polarization come from? What has caused it?
Let's have a look at that right now.
[Inaudible].
Our history of polarization traces back to the end of the 1960s.
These were the times of Nixon hippies and the Vietnam war.
[Inaudible].
You might believe that those years were especially turbulent for the American
media, but the opposite is actually true.
Back then almost all Americans got their news from the same sources for a better
understanding.
95% of the TV news audience came from just three stations,
ABC, NBC and CBS.
We are talking about traditional more balanced media.
Those TVs aims to be nonpartisan,
and they gave voice to both sides of the spectrum because they wanted to capture
as much of the market as they could. But everything changed in 1988.
Good evening. I'm David Walker and I'm Lois Hart. Now here's the news.
So what happened in 1980? You guessed it. This was the year in which CNN,
the cable news network was born.
CNN was the first TV channel offering news for 24.
And the format was an unprecedented success.
And during the eighties and nineties, more and more cable TV channels arose.
Of course not all of them were about news,
but the cable TV phenomenon kept growing and growing. And years later in 1996,
two other big news stations were born MSNBC,
liberal news outlet and Fox news, a conservative.
[Inaudible].
All of a sudden viewers didn't have just three TV news options to choose from,
but lots of them cable TV became the go-to way for Americans to get information
by the year 2006,
58.4% of American households had cable TV.
And those legacy outlets such as ABC,
NBC or CBS were losing their share of the audience.
[Inaudible].
This point? I know what some of you are thinking,
what exactly is the problem here? The more competition we have on news,
the better, the quality, right? Well, yeah,
that sort of makes sense until we think about it in terms of corporate strategy,
what is the best strategy to survive in a competitive market? Of course,
the answer is specialization. We call it market segmentation.
You can see on this very platform, YouTube,
most of the channels who reach a big audience are those who specialize on a
specific niche, science politics or video games,
but how can a news channel specialize? What niches can they try to appeal to?
Of course there are always channels focused on economics or sports,
but for many, the answer was ideology.
[Inaudible].
The Fox news phenomenon. Fox news is the fifth biggest TV news show and America.
However, if you are a democratic voter chances, are you never watched them?
They're not.
So secret formula is that they have become a go-to for conservatives 65%
of the Republican voters watch Fox news.
And this translates and to millions of years, and as always happens,
whenever a company achieves success, the others follow suit today,
the ideological news formula has been.
[Inaudible].
Have you ever heard of the Huffington post? Have you haven't don't worry.
And five, totally. 63% of the American public news about their existence.
Then again, they have a huge audience. Why?
Because 81% of the self-proclaimed liberal Democrats will love them. So,
okay. I can see what you're thinking now. So what is the problem here?
This is a smart business strategy. Consumers are happy businesses make money.
Everyone's happy, right? But no. Think about it this way.
If you are getting your news from Huffington post and only from Huffington post,
you are seeing a completely different reality from someone who watches only Fox
news. It's late coming from different planets. Just have a loop.
This
[inaudible] woman who lost.
To COVID-19, his only condition.
Was trusting Donald Trump.
Of course, this headline is pretty exaggerated.
I doubt this woman really believes that trusting Donald Trump makes you more
likely to get COVID-19. But think about it. This is a piece from CNN news.
Then again, do you really think it was made to report total reality?
Clearly not.
The goal of this article is to confirm the reader's biases against Trump.
People who disliked Trump want to see that,
but let's keep to this story for a moment because that woman became viral during
the campaign.
Apparently she wrote an obituary after her father's untimely death,
the became extremely popular on the internet days later,
she was called to participate at the national democratic convention.
She had just become an anti Trump symbol,
and that is not by pure chance. Think about it this way.
Ideological media creates spaces for those who share the same values.
This creates more ideologically consistent voters.
And this is pure gold for political campaigners.
Governor Michael Dukakis vetoed, mandatory sentences for drug dealers.
He vetoed the death penalty is revolving door prison policy gave weekend
fellows to first degree murder is not eligible for parole.
You see one of the biggest myths when it comes to electoral campaigning is that
you want to appeal to the mainstream audience. In fact,
the right strategy has to appeal to different niches of the public to maximize
turnout. And according to the Pew research center,
consistent liberals and conservatives are twice as likely to vote and
donate money to campaigns. Also,
they tend to be much more influential in their own communities.
All of this means a golden opportunity when it comes to electoral campaigns.
[Inaudible] politics. It's what you perceive to be true. That's true. Truth.
Arthur Finkelstein.
The man you just saw on your screen is Arthur Finkelstein.
We could say this man alongside with Lee Atwater and Cole rule are the
godfathers of the modern political strategy. During the eighties,
these three men redefined the Republican strategy or their advice,
political campaigns stop being based on the issues.
I became a matter of ideology and identity. This says,
instead of defending a list of issues, they put the focus on specific policies.
One becomes Republican because he or she votes for a whole ideological and
identity Syrian package. When they vote,
they're not choosing one policy over another,
but instead they are owning their own.
We
[inaudible] now on anyone who belongs to the Republican party will automatically
find himself in the same group as the opponents of abortion.
And anyone who supports abortion will automatically be labeled a Democrat Arthur
Finkelstein.
This might surprise you,
but this strategy was a success since the very beginning,
since the year 1995 through to 2007 Republicans dominated both
the Senate and the house of representatives. And this is thanks to the,
that Finkelstein then Atwater. And finally Rueve created and here,
let me make a digression by no means.
This is a critique to the political strategists,
a political strategist as a professional, whose job is to win elections,
not to win Nobel prizes. On this regard,
the Republican campaigns of the nineties are a political classic.
If you're watching this video and you were planning to work in elections,
you should really study their work. And this is exactly what the Democrats did.
Little by little identity politics has become the cornerstone of every election
on both sides of the debate. Not only in America, but everywhere.
And I know what you're going to say now, again, where is the problem here?
Candidates want to win elections that as democracy,
we like to debate about big ideas, not about small specific issues.
So pay attention now because you're about to see just how big this problem.
Six.
Of disagreement at this point,
I can pretty much already imagine the comment section on this video, dude,
do you know where you find consensus in North Korea?
They just have one political party. So it's the end of all discussion and yeah,
you're right. Democracy is the celebration of disagreement.
It makes sense to have different parties with different ideas.
This is what we have in a thing called parliamentary politics,
But let's not forget. The bells are passed after a consensus is reached.
And in most cases, those laws are voted by politicians from different parties,
a bipartisan democracy as the American one is designed to be works so that we
can have Republicans and Democrats getting to some kind of agreement.
Usually through compromise.
Strange as it sounds. This is Ben,
the common thread through most of the history of this country.
Let's take an example. The 1964 civil rights act,
The law that banned racial segregation in the Southern United States.
And it passed with 70% support of the 70%. Yes,
136 votes came to the Republican party and 153 came from the democratic
party of the 30%, no votes.
91 were Democrats and 35 Republicans back then by partisan
agreements were the norm, even in the 1980s, Ronald Reagan,
a Republican president at a close personal friendship with tip O'Neill a
democratic congressperson and the speaker of the house.
Pardon.
Led to many important bipartisan bills getting paid.
And you might think, okay, but these are just some quaint stories.
Can we really say American legislative houses are more polarized now? Well,
the truth is this can actually be measured easily.
Just have a look at this infographic video by business insider,
the blue balls represent a politician from the democratic party.
The red ones represent a Republican politician.
Here.
You can see how Congress people voted between 1967 and 1969.
You can see how many connections there are between the red and the blue dots.
All of these connections are those different votes where the Democrats and the
Republicans reached a compromise during the 1970s in the 1980s,
we can see how the connections between these are kind of similar.
Now let's fast forward to the two thousands.
You can see how there are less and less connections between red and blue dots.
By the 2011 to 2013 Congress only a few blue dots are interacting
with the red ones. And there are thousands of examples that reflect this wedge.
For example, in 2010, the Senate approved the affordable care act.
What the media coined as about.
[Inaudible].
This law was passed with 51% of support from this 51%,
219 votes came from the democratic party.
And none came from the Republicans. Yeah, that's right. None.
Unlike the civil rights act, this law came without any conservative support.
This law has two problems.
The first one is that we are talking about a law that came out with very little
that made conservatives happy and they fight it to this day. But not only that,
having a Congress and the Senate so divided,
it is harder and harder to pass a budget.
And that explains news like this.
Longest government shutdown in history ends after Trump relents on wall.
On previous visual politic videos,
we've already explained what a government shutdown is all about.
This is what happens in America.
When the two houses cannot reach a compromise to pass the budget.
And that moment the government cannot pay the civil sevens as employees.
And it has to furlough them the longest government shutdown that happened during
the Trump administration and the year 2019, it was 35 days.
There's an 18, there was another one, but lasted only three days.
But this is not just something that happened to Donald Trump during the Obama
administration in 2013, another government shut down, but lasted 16 days.
You have to go back to 1996 to find another case similar to this and this
case,
we will be talking about a 21 day shutdown during the Clinton administration.
So as you can see, there is a trend here.
Shutdowns are starting to become more common.
And this trend is a very expensive one.
The last shutdown costs $5 billion to the American treasury.
And that is not the worst consequence of political polarization.
The worst consequence is news like this.
[Inaudible].
George Floyd protests man killed in Detroit as demonstrations,
rage across us,
Antifa protestor implicated in killing of Trump supporter in
[inaudible] surgeons of the U S paramilitary rights.
[inaudible].
So now the question goes over to you.
Do you think your country is getting more polarized over time?
What can online media outlets like this one do in order to combat that?
And what does this mean for the future?
Please leave your answers for us in the comment section below.
If you want to learn more about political polarization,
you can check out my book, wedge,
how you became a tool of the partisan political establishment and how to start
thinking for yourself again, which I co-wrote with my good friend, Nat green.
You can find it in the description box below and in it,
we expand on everything we talked about today.
You can also find me at the reconsider media podcast,
where we've been talking about political polarization for the last five.
Years. And as always, don't forget that we publish brand new videos every week.
So subscribe to visual politics and not bell button down there.
So you wouldn't miss any of our updates. Have you liked this video,
please give us a like, and as always, we'll see you next time.
If you want to learn more about politics and world affairs,
and here's some more of my lovely voice,
check out the reconsidered podcast where we don't do the thinking for you find
reconsider@wwwdotreconsideredmedia.com or on Apple or Google play or your
favorite podcast.